Let’s summarize what we’ve
learned about controlling
pipelined systems.
The most
straightforward approach
is to use a pipeline
with the system
clock chosen to accommodate
the worst-case processing time.
These systems are easy to
design but can’t produce higher
throughputs if the processing
stages might run more quickly
for some data values.
We saw that we could
use a simple handshake
protocol to move data
through the system.
All communication still
happens on the rising edge
of the system clock, but
the specific clock edge
used to transfer
data is determined
by the stages themselves.
It’s tempting to wonder if we
can might adjust the global
clock period to take advantage
of data-dependent processing
speedups.
But the necessary
timing generators
can be very complicated
in large systems.
It’s usually much easier to
use local communication between
modules to determine system
timing than trying to figure
out all the constraints
at the system level.
So this approach isn’t
usually a good one.
But what about locally-timed
asynchronous systems
like the example we just saw?
Each generation of engineers
has heard the siren call
of asynchronous logic.
Sadly, it usually proves
too hard to produce
a provably reliable
design for a large system,
say, a modern computer.
But there are special cases,
such as the logic for integer
division, where the
data-dependent speed-ups
make the extra work worthwhile.
We characterized the
performance of our systems
by measuring their
latency and throughput.
For combinational
circuits, the latency
is simply the propagation
delay of the circuit
and its throughput
is just 1/latency.
We introduced a systematic
strategy for designing
K-pipelines, where there’s a
register on the outputs of each
stage, and there are exactly
K registers on every path from
input to output.
The period of the
system clock t_CLK
is determined by the propagation
delay of the slowest pipeline
stage.
The throughput of a pipelined
system is 1/t_CLK and its
latency is K times t_CLK.
Pipelining is the
key to increasing
the throughput of most
high-performance digital
systems.